Add sequential workshop tutorial format (pick-and-place seed) (#5104)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/tutorials/pick-and-place/04-control-the-robot-from-python.md

type: "docs"
slug: "control-the-robot-from-python"
weight: 40
description: "Connect from your laptop and drive the saved static pick-and-place sequence from a Python script."
workshop: "pick-and-place"
toc_hide: true
phase: 4
phase_total: 6
time_estimate: "15 minutes"
prev: "/tutorials/pick-and-place/static-positions/"
next: "/tutorials/pick-and-place/perception-guided-picking/"
aliases:
  - /tutorials/pick-and-place/local-python-script/
languages: ["python"]
---

In this phase you write and run a Python script on your laptop that connects to the robot and executes the static pick-and-place sequence from Phase 3. This proves your connection, environment, and named positions work end to end before you add perception in Phase 5.

## Why a script before a module

Everything you did in Phase 3 happened by clicking test cards on the **CONTROL** tab. That is a fine way to verify hardware, but it does not scale: you cannot loop, branch on a sensor reading, or retry a failed grasp from a button. A local Python script gives you those things, plus fast iteration, a local debugger, and the ability to sprinkle in `print` statements wherever you need visibility into what the robot is doing.

> A script is also the right starting point before you package anything as a module. A module has to satisfy a defined lifecycle and run inside `viam-server`, which makes it slower to iterate on and harder to debug. In Phase 6 you package this same logic as a module. For now, a script you run from your own terminal, that you can stop, edit, and rerun in seconds, is the faster path to a working pick-and-place loop.

Reviewer: This may need more information to differentiate a module vs the python script here, It might be good to explain that this is using the Viam sdk to talk to resources, but viam also offers something called a module that provides more structure with additional features? Could be good to add a question section in this phase, what is the difference between the python script we ran and a module, and when would you want to use each?

<!-- ASSET P0 connect-tab-boilerplate (UI+): CONNECT -> Python SDK, connection block highlighted, credentials REDACTED. See plans/2026-07-02-pick-and-place-shot-list.md -->

{{<imgproc src="/tutorials/pick-and-place/connect-tab-boilerplate.png" resize="1200x" declaredimensions=true alt="The CONNECT tab showing the Python SDK connection code with the machine address and API key.">}}

The machine address, also known as the "remote address" or fully-qualified domain name (FQDN), can also be found in the dropdown from the **Online** indicator. The API key and ID can also be found and created from the **API keys** section of the **CONNECT** tab.

{{< alert title="Handle your API key like a secret" color="note" >}}
Your API key grants control of the robot to anyone who has it. Do not commit it to version control. The companion repo's `.gitignore` already excludes the starter script's typical edit locations, but the safer pattern is to read the key from an environment variable instead of pasting it directly into the file, for example `API_KEY = os.environ["VIAM_API_KEY"]`.
{{< /alert >}}

## Get typed resource handles

> After the connection opens, the script builds typed handles for each resource you drive in this phase:

Reviewer: consider including two or three additional sentences explaining typed resources, and how viam server provides and connects to these models. Consider referencing the gripper as am example since it's methods are pretty simple, and relate it to the available methods compared to the actions in the test card.

```python
arm = Arm.from_robot(machine, "arm-1")
gripper = Gripper.from_robot(machine, "gripper-1")

home = Switch.from_robot(machine, "home-pose")
approach = Switch.from_robot(machine, "approach-pose")
grasp = Switch.from_robot(machine, "grasp-pose")
travel = Switch.from_robot(machine, "travel-pose")
place_pose = Switch.from_robot(machine, "place-pose")
```

> Phase 4 drives only the arm, the gripper, and these pose switches. Right below them, the starter script keeps a `vision` handle for the `vision-segment` service commented out, because you do not add that service until Phase 5. `VisionClient.from_robot` raises a `ResourceNotFoundError` for a service that is not present, so leave that line commented for now:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Phase 4 drives only the arm, the gripper, and these pose switches. Right below them, the starter script keeps a `vision` handle for the `vision-segment` service commented out, because you do not add that service until Phase 5. `VisionClient.from_robot` raises a `ResourceNotFoundError` for a service that is not present, so leave that line commented for now:

Reviewer: leave a comment in code mentioning the vision client is needed in phase 5 and remove the paragraph here

> ```python

Reviewer: leave a comment in code mentioning the vision client is needed in phase 5 and remove the code snippet here

# vision = VisionClient.from_robot(machine, "vision-segment")
```

> ## Run the script

Reviewer: Consider printing the resources only on the first run, then comment in the move methods in the script, then run again to get the arm to move

{{< alert title="The script moves the arm" color="caution" >}}
Running the script drives the arm through the full static sequence immediately after it prints the resource list. Clear the workspace and keep the e-stop within reach before you run it.
{{< /alert >}}

Run the script now with `uv run starter-script.py`. It happens in a single run: `connect()` opens the connection, the script prints every resource on the machine, and then it immediately drives the arm through the static sequence. Watch the printed resource list scroll past in your terminal before the arm starts moving.

The first thing printed is the full resource list:

```python
print(machine.resource_names)
```

{{< checkpoint >}}
`machine.resource_names` prints a list that includes at least `arm-1`, `gripper-1`, and `cam-1`, the five poses (`home-pose`, `approach-pose`, `grasp-pose`, `travel-pose`, `place-pose`) as switches, and the three obstacles from Phase 3 as grippers. The list also contains the `builtin` motion service and other `erh:vmodutils` entries, so expect more names than just these.
{{< /checkpoint >}}

> Right after the print, the script runs the static sequence. This is the same sequence you tested by hand from the **CONTROL** tab at the end of Phase 3, now expressed as code instead of button clicks. On a switch, `set_position(2)` executes the pose it has saved:

Reviewer: consider explaining what the switch interface set_position method does for the arm position saver briefly, (depending on how it was referenced in the previous section)

- **Connection failures.** If `connect()` raises an error or hangs, double-check the `MACHINE_ADDRESS`, `API_KEY`, and `API_KEY_ID` values against the **CONNECT** tab. A stale or mistyped API key produces an authentication error immediately; a wrong address usually times out instead. Also confirm the machine shows the green **Live** indicator in the Viam app. A machine that is not live cannot accept a connection no matter how correct your credentials are.
- **Resource-name mismatches.** If `Arm.from_robot(machine, "arm-1")` or a similar call raises a not-found error, the name in your script does not match the name on the **CONFIGURE** tab. Names are exact strings, not approximations, so `arm-1` and `arm_1` are different resources as far as the SDK is concerned. Open `resource_names` from the connection checkpoint above and compare it character for character against the names your script uses.

> - **A switch does nothing on `set_position(2)`.** This means the pose was never saved. Go back to the **CONTROL** tab and set that switch to position 1 to save the current arm position, as you did in Phase 3, then rerun the script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **A switch does nothing on `set_position(2)`.** This means the pose was never saved. You will need to update the arm position saver by moving the arm to the correct pose and save it, as you did in Phase 3, then rerun the script.
```

> With `resource_names` printing everything you expect and the static sequence running end to end from your own code, you have working proof that your connection, your named resources, and your saved poses all hold up under real code, not just button clicks. In Phase 5 you replace the fixed `approach-pose` and `grasp-pose` in this sequence with positions computed from images and depth data from the camera, so the arm picks whichever block the camera actually detects instead of always reaching for the same spot.

Reviewer: Consider removing the forward facing statement and instead say, You are ready to integrate perception in Phase 5, with a link to phase 5.
